1

Self-Reference Ultra-Wideband Systems

arXiv:0911.5153v5 [cs.NI] 27 Jun 2018

Athanasios S. Lioumpas

Abstract—Towards
employing
low
complexity
transceivers for signal reception in Ultra-Wideband (UWB)
systems, Transmitted Reference (TR) and Differential
TR (DTR) schemes have attracted researchers’ attention.
In this letter, we introduce an alternative, less complex
scheme, called Self Reference (SR) UWB transceiver,
which uses a modified replica of the received signal
itself as reference pulse, resulting in double data rates
compared to TR schemes. Moreover, SR eliminates the
need for delay lines at the receiver side, which constitute
a major drawback of the conventional TR and DTR
schemes, while it also requires no channel estimations,
resulting in lower complexity implementations and power
savings. The performance of the SR scheme is investigated
in high-frequency (HF) channels, showing that it offers
a better or comparable performance to that of DTR,
depending on the channel conditions.
Index Terms—Differential Transmitted Reference UWB,
Self Reference UWB, Transmitted Reference UWB.

I. I NTRODUCTION
The optimum diversity combining scheme, in terms
of performance, is the all-Rake (ARake) receiver which
resolves all multipath components (MPCs) that are often
more than 100 in typical Ultra-Wideband (UWB) scenarios [1]-[2]. In order to eliminate the need for the channel
estimations, Hoctor and Tomlinson proposed a simple non-coherent Transmitted Reference (TR) scheme,
which was able to capture the energy of the multipath
components [3]. An unmodulated known reference pulse
is transmitted prior to each data-modulated pulse within
the coherence time of the channel in order for the
two pulses to experience the same channel condition.
An autocorrelation receiver is applied and the received
reference signal is used as a template to demodulate
the data symbol. Hence, each data bit requires the
transmission of two pulses, that is the reference and the
signal one, leading in a 50% rate loss. Moreover, TR
systems experience a 3dB performance loss, because of
the usage of a noisy template [4]-[6]. Another drawback
is the requirement of a delay line, which increases the
implementation complexity, adds extra power consumption and interrupts the synchronization at the reception.
Synchronization in the sub-nanosecond range is the key
parameter in the signal correlation, energy capture and
data demodulation of IR signals for UWB systems [7].

An alternative Differential TR (DTR) scheme was
presented in [8], offering double data rates and reduced
inter-symbol interference (ISI). In DTR the data are
differentially modulated using the previously sent data
pulse, and hence the transmission of an extra reference
pulse is not required. However, DTR still requires the
implementation of the delay line. Moreover, due to
the differential functionality, erroneous detection of a
symbol may affect the correct tracing of the next one,
resulting in performance degradation.
In this letter, we introduce a novel and simple scheme
for UWB applications with binary antipodal modulation,
called Self Reference UWB (SR), which uses as a
reference signal the absolute value of the received signal
multiplied by the positive Gaussian monocycle waveform. Compared to the conventional TR schemes which
transmit two pulses for one data symbol, SR constructs
the reference pulse from the received data symbol, resulting in double data rates (like DTR), lower complexity
and saving of computational resources without adding
further power consumption. Moreover, depending on the
channel conditions the SR scheme offers comparable or
better performance compared to DTR because of the
elimination of the error propagation of DTR when a
data symbol is erroneously decoded, while the absence
of the delay line (implemented both in TR and DTR
schemes) reduces the complexity of the system, the
power consumption and the synchronization between the
transmitter and the receiver. The performance of the SR
scheme is investigated in high-frequency (HF) channels,
showing that it offers a better or comparable performance
to that of DTR.
II. S YSTEM M ODEL

AND

M ODE

OF

O PERATION

A. Channel Model
The HF channel model (proposed by the IEEE
802.15.3a standardization group) is widely used in UWB
research works and it is used for the evaluation of
the performance of the proposed SR scheme. The HF
UWB channel model is based on the Saleh-Valenzuela
channel model [9] and is intended to represent the
channel characteristics in the frequency range from 3.1
to 10.6 GHz [10]. According to this model, the received
signal arrive in L clusters each containing K + 1 rays.

2

sT R (t) =
(2)
∞
∞
X
X
g(t − iTfT R − Td )
b⌊i/Ns ⌋ g(t − iTfT R ) +
i=−∞

i=−∞

{z

|

Fig. 1. (a) Transmitted frame of conventional TR scheme, DTR and
SR, (b) Procedure followed by data signal (+1, −1).
Transmitter

Data Source

Antipodal
Wireless channel

(+1,-1)

Modulation

}

s(t)

|

{z

}

sref (t)

where b⌊i/Ns ⌋ ∈ {1, −1} are the equiprobable data
bits, g(t) is the transmitted monocycle waveform that
is non-zero for t ∈ (0, Tw ), Tw is the duration of the
pulse and TfT R is the frame duration, which is assumed
to be shorter than the multipath delay spread Tmds
resulting in inter-pulse interference. The index ⌊i/Ns ⌋,
i.e., the integer part of i/Ns is the index of the data bit
modulating the data waveform in the ith frame, while
Ns is the number of the transmitted frames, required for
achieving an adequate bit energy at the receiver. The first
sum of (2), (s(t)), denotes the transmitted information
bits and the second sum, (sref (t)), is the reference pulse
transmitted Td seconds later (see Fig. 1).
The transmitted signal passes through the HF multipath channel and the received signal of the TR system
can be written as

Receiver

i / Ns

iTfSR+T mds

(.)

X

abs

dt

i=

iTfSR

N +N -1

i / Ns

s

s

rT R (t) =

Threshold Device

∞ L−1
K
X
XX
i
)
aik,l b⌊i/Ns ⌋ g(t − iTfT R − τk,l

Symbol detection

(Desicion every

N

s

N

s

frames)

i=−∞ l=0 k=0

X

|

Gaussian

}

K
∞ L−1
XX
X
i
) + n(t)
+
aik,l g(t − iTfT R − Td − τk,l

Monocycle

i=−∞ l=0 k=0

Fig. 2. The structure of the SR transceiver.

L−1
K
XX

i
aik,l δ t − Tli − τk,l

{z

|

The channel impulse response of the i-th realization is
defined as

hi (t) = Xi

{z

r(t)



(1)

l=0 k=0

where aik,l is the tap weight associated with the k-th ray
of the l-th cluster, Xi is the log-normal shadowing and
i are the cluster and ray arrival times, respectively.
Tli , τk,l

B. Conventional TR scheme
In a binary TR UWB communication system the
transmitted signal is given by [8]

rR (t)

}

where r(t) denotes the received information bits, rR (t)
the received reference signal and n(t) represents the
additive noise, which is a zero-mean complex Gaussian
random process with two-sided power spectral density
2N0 . At the receiver rR (t) is delayed by Td seconds,
using delay line, and then correlated with the first part,
i.e., r(t), so that a decision on the transmitted bits can
be made.
C. SR scheme
The mode of operation of the SR transceiver is depicted in Fig. 2. Analytically, the transmitted signal of
the SR is given by
sSR (t) =

∞
X
i=−∞

b⌊i/Ns ⌋ g(t − iTfSR )

(3)

3

TABLE I
C ORRELATION VALUES ASSUMING THAT THE SNR→ ∞.
-1

10

Ref. signal
rR (t)
|rSR (t)|
|rSR (t)|gm (t)

Correlation (CM1-CM2)
1
1
0.3829
0.3987
0.6745
0.7055

-2

10

ABEP

TR
ASR
SR

Data signal
r(t)
rSR (t)
rSR (t)

where TfSR is the frame duration of the SR, which is
assumed to be shorter than Tmds resulting in interference between data pulses. The transmitted signal passes
through the HF multipath channel and is corrupted by
the AWGN. The received signal is given by

-3

10

DTR (ST=2T

TR

)

All Rake
-4

10

OOK (Threshold=4*N )
0

OOK (Threshold=2*N )
0

OOK (Threshold=N )
0

SR
-5

K
∞ L−1
XX
X
i
)+n (t) .
aik,l b⌊i/Ns ⌋ g(t−iTfSR −τk,l
rSR (t) =

10

0

10

20

30

40

E /N
b

50

0

60

70

80

(dB)

i=−∞ l=0 k=0

The basic idea behind the SR scheme is that for the case
of binary antipodal modulation only, we can ”mimic”
the positive reference pulse that is used in TR schemes,
by using a modified version of the received data signal
itself, e.g. the absolute value |rSR (t)|. Considering two
different cases of the HF channel model1 and by simply
using |rSR (t)|2 as a reference for symbol detection, the
correlation between rSR (t) and |rSR (t)| is not higher
than 0.4 for the high SNR regime (see Table I). This
absolute self reference scheme (ASR) is problematic due
to the cutoff of the negative values of the received signal.
A more precise ”mimic” of the actual reference signal
can be obtained by multiplying |rSR (t)| with gm (t),
where gm (t) = g(t) for t ∈ (0, Tw ) and gm (t) = 1 for
t ∈ (Tw , TfSR ). The value of gm (t) for t ≥ Tw is defined
to be equal to one in order to take into consideration all
the available energy received in the duration of a frame
as the transmitted signal suffers from severe scattering
because of the impact of the channel. Consequently,
this is a suboptimum solution used for collecting the
spread energy. As shown in Table I, this multiplication
almost doubles the correlation value, which could be
sufficient for making decision on the transmitted data
bits. Using the product |rSR (t)|gm (t) as the reference
signal at the receiver, a 50% rate gain is achieved (see
Fig. 1a), compared to TR schemes. Using this modified
replica of the received signal, the correlator’s output
passes through a low pass filter. The energy over Ns
frames is gathered, before a threshold device is used
for recovering the originally transmitted symbols. The
SR frame is presented in Fig. 1(b) as processed at the
transmitter and the receiver, and it is shown that the
1
We note that the values of Table I, are the average correlation
values, over 109 HF channel realizations.
2
The absolute value of a signal can be obtained with a precision
absolute value circuit [11].

Fig. 3. The ABEP of the proposed SR scheme compared to DTR,
the optimum ARake and the OOK schemes assuming the LOS CM1
channel model.

frame duration, TfSR , of the SR scheme is the half of
the TR.
Compared to the conventional TR schemes, the two
major advantages of the proposed system are the absence
of the transmittion of a separate reference pulse, which
doubles the data rate and the absence of a delay line
at the receiver. The implementation of a delay line
at the receiver is usually the most difficult part to
implement since it must provide delay times greater
than the pulse width. The power consumption and the
interruption to the critical task of the synchronization of
the non-coherent scheme are also problems rooted by the
operation of the delay line.
Compared to the DTR scheme, the SR does not require
a delay line, while the detection process of each symbol
is independent of the correct detection of the previous
symbol, which may result in performance improvements,
under specific channel conditions.
III. P ERFORMANCE A NALYSIS
In this section we evaluate the performance of the
proposed SR scheme in terms of the average bit error
probability (ABEP) and compare it with the optimal All
Rake, which is optimum receiver in terms of perfroamnce, the DTR and the On-Off keying (OOK) transceiver
which is the baseline receiver in terms of complexity.
Performance comparisons between the DTR and the TR
schemes can be found in [8]. A second order derivative
Gaussian monocycle with Tw = 0.7 nsec has been used
with TfT R = 10.75 nsec, TfSR = TfDT R = 5.375 nsec
and Td = 8.75 nsec for DTR where the data pulse is
delayed for serving as reference to the next symbol.

4

-1

10

-2

ABEP

10

-3

10

All Rake
SR
-4

DTR (CT = 2T

10

)

TR

DTR (CT = 10T

)

DTR (CT = 20T

)

DTR (CT = 50T

)

TR

TR

TR

-5

10

0

10

20

30

E /N
b

40

0

50

60

70

(dB)

Fig. 4. The ABEP of the proposed SR scheme compared to DTR
and the optimum ARake schemes assuming the LOS CM2 channel
model and different channel coherence time.

Moreover, for comparison reasons, the simulation parameters are the same as those in [2], as well as the path-loss
channel model3 [2], [12]. ISI is taken into account in the
analysis, while a frame per simulated symbol is assumed.
In Fig. 3, the ABEP is plotted against the Signal-toEb
where Eb denotes the
Noise Ratio (SNR), defined as N
0
transmitted symbol’s energy, assuming the CM1 channel
model, which refers to the line of sight (LOS) case
in residential environments [13]. Considering the OOK
scheme, and since specifying the optimum threshold for
the OOK receiver is beyond the scope of this paper, its
performance was examined for three different decision
thresholds, i.e. N0 , 2N0 and 4N0 , revealing the behavior
of this receiver with respect to that threshold. The OOK
receiver’s performance approaches that of the SR’s one
only for high values of the SNR, where the received
energy within a time window is adequate for deciding
whether a signal has been transmitted or not.
The SR offers a comparable performance to that of
DTR. This is a result of the fact that the data detection
of a symbol in DTR scheme is affected by the correct
detection of the previous one, which may result in the
propagation of errors. On the other hand, in the SR
scheme the detection of each symbol is independent
from the previous one. For the case of the DTR and
SR schemes the error floor is caused by the ISI.
The results presented in Fig. 4 are based on CM2
channel model, which refers to non line of sight (NLOS)
case [13]. The performance degradation of all systems
is noticeable compared to CM1 and is a consequence
3

This path loss model is the reason for the SNR range in the figures
that follow. The same model is used for comparison reasons.

of the severe scattering from which the signal suffers as
we refer to a NLOS environment. Moreover, the performance of DTR is theoretically affected by the coherence
time of the channel [14] as the data detection in DTR is
affected by the resemblance of two consecutive channel
responses. For instance, when transmitting four symbols
and assuming a channel coherence time of two symbols,
the channel response will differ between the second and
the third symbol, affecting the autocorrelation operation at the receiver and hence the error performance.
On the other hand, the SR scheme is not affected by
this assumption, since the reference pulse is directly
constructed by the same received signal. However, the
performance of DTR is practically not affected, since
usually the time interval between the pulses is in the
order of 100nsec, while the coherence time is in the
order of 0.1 − 1msec.
The results are different for extreme NLOS multipath
channels with significant RMS delay spread (e.g. CM3
and CM4), where the strong multipath components do
not coincide with the first arriving ones, which results in
a performance degradation for SR. Therefore, in order
to improve the performance of the proposed structure,
the duration of the transmitted pulse must be increased
in order to take advantage of the spread energy. For
example, considering the CM4 channel, a pulse duration
of TW = 0.1 nsec cannot result in an ABEP lower
than 0.1, while better performance can be achieved with
TW = 30.1 nsec, e.g. ABEP=10−3 for SNR=27dB.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
An alternative transceiver for UWB applications was
introduced, called Self Reference (SR) UWB transceiver,
which uses a modified replica of the received signal itself
as reference pulse, resulting in double data rates compared to TR schemes. The proposed scheme eliminates
the need for delay lines at the receiver side, as well
as the need for channel estimations, resulting in lower
complexity and power savings. The performance of the
SR scheme was investigated in HF channels, showing
that it offers a better or comparable performance to that
of DTR, depending on the channel conditions.
R EFERENCES
[1] C. Snow, L. Lampe, and R. Schober, “Performance Analysis and
Enhancement of Multiband OFDM for UWB Communications,”
IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 2182–2192,
June 2007.
[2] D. Cassioli, M. Z. Win, F. Vatalaro and A. F. Molisch,
“Low Complexity Rake Receivers in Ultra-Wideband Channels,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 6, pp. 1265-1275,
no. 4, April 2007.

5

[3] R. Hoctor and H. Tomlinson, “Delay-hopped transmittedreference RF communications,” IEEE UWBST, pp. 265-269,
2002, Baltimore, MD.
[4] Y. Chao and R. A. Scholtz, “Ultra–Wideband Transmitted
Reference Systems”, IEEE Trans. on Vehic. Techn., vol. 54,
pp. 1556–1569, Sept. 2005.
[5] T. Q. S. Quek and M. Z. Win, “Analysis of UWB Transmitted–
Reference Communications Systems in Dense Multipath Channels”, IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun, vol. 23, pp. 1863–1874, no.
9, Sept. 2005.
[6] Romme, J. and K. Witrisal, “Transmitted-reference UWB systems using weighted autocorre-lation receivers,” IEEETrans. on
Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 54, No. 4, 1754–1761,
Apr. 2006.
[7] M. Casu and G. Durisi, “Implementation aspects of a
transmitted-reference UWB receiver”, Wirel. Commun. Mob.
Comput., vol. 5, pp. 537 2005.
[8] Y. L. Chao and R. A. Scholtz, “Optimal and suboptimal receivers for ultra-wideband transmitted reference systems,” Proc.
IEEE Global Telecommun. (Globecom ’03), vol. 2, pp. 759–763,
San Francisco, CA, Dec. 2003.
[9] A. A. Saleh and R. A. Valenzuela, “A statistical model for
indoor multipath propagation,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun.,
vol. 5, pp. 128–137, Feb. 1987.
[10] J. R. Foerster, “Channel modeling sub-committee report final,”
in Tech. Rep. P802.15 02/490r1, IEEE 802.15 SG3a, Feb. 2003.
[11] H. A. Wittlinger, “Absolute Value Circuit,” Patent No. US
6,724,233 B1, Apr. 2004.
[12] S. S. Ghassemzadeh, L. J. Greenstein, A. Kavcic, T. Sveinsson
and V. Tarokh, ”UWB indoor path loss model for residential
and commercial buildings”, Proc. of. VTC 2003-Fall, vol 5, pp.
3115-3119.
[13] A. F. Molisch, D. Cassioli, C. Chong, S. Emami, A. Fort, B.
Kannan, J. Karedal, J. Kunish, H. G. Schantz, K. Siwiak and
M. Z. Win, “A Comprehensive Standardized Model for Ultrawideband Propagation Channels,” IEEE Trans. on Antennas and
Propagation, vol. 54, pp. 3151-3159, 11 Nov. 2006.
[14] J. D. Choi and W. E. Stark, “Performance of ultra-wideband
communications with suboptimal receivers in multipath channels,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 20, no. 9, pp. 1754
- 1766, Dec. 2002.

