Towards Power Efficient MAC Protocol for In-Body
and On-Body Sensor Networks
Sana Ullah, Xizhi An, and Kyung Sup Kwak
Graduate School of Telecommunication Engineering
253 Yonghyun-Dong, Nam-Gu, 402-751, Inha University Incheon South Korea
sanajcs@hotmail.com, anxizhi@hotmail.com, kskwak@inha.ac.kr

Abstract. This paper presents an empirical discussion on the design and implementation of a power-efficient Medium Access Control (MAC) protocol for
in-body and on-body sensor networks. We analyze the performance of a beacon-enabled IEEE 802.15.4, PB-TDMA, and S-MAC protocols for on-body
sensor networks. We further present a Traffic Based Wakeup Mechanism that
utilizes the traffic patterns of the BAN Nodes (BNs) to accommodate the entire
BSN traffic. To enable a logical connection between different BNs working on
different frequency bands, a method called Bridging function is proposed. The
Bridging function integrates all BNs working on different bands into a complete
BSN.
Keywords: BSN, WBAN, MAC, Traffic, Based, Mechanisms, Bridging, Inbody, On-body, Sensor Networks.

1 Introduction
The remote monitoring of body status and the surrounding environment are becoming more important for sporting activities, the safety of members of the emergency
services, members of the military and health care. The levels of fitness required for
the very competitive international sporting events require athletes to be at the very
pinnacle of fitness with every muscle used to its utmost. Furthermore, many body
functions are traditionally monitored only rarely and separated by a considerable
period of time. This can give a very incomplete picture of what is really happening.
Consider a patient visiting a doctor for a blood pressure check; he/she may be anxious
and thus have elevated pressure resulting in an inaccurate diagnosis. If, however, the
patient can be fitted with a simple monitoring system that requires no intervention,
then a picture can be built up of how the pressure changes through the day when
he/she goes about their normal business. This will give a better picture of what is
happening and remove inaccurate results caused by going to visit the doctor. To
achieve these requirements, monitoring of movement and body function are essential.
This monitoring requires the sensors and wireless system to be very lightweight and
to be integrated unobtrusively into the clothing.
A Body Sensor Network (BSN) allows the integration of intelligent, miniaturized,
low power, invasive and non-invasive sensor nodes to monitor body function and the
A. Håkansson et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2009, LNAI 5559, pp. 335–345, 2009.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

336

S. Ullah, X. An, and K.S. Kwak

surrounding environment. Each intelligent node has enough capability to process and
forward information to a base station for diagnosis and prescription. A BSN provides
long term health monitoring of patients under natural physiological states without
constraining their normal activities. It can be used to develop a smart and affordable
health care system and can be a part of diagnostic procedure, maintenance of chronic
condition, supervised recovery from a surgical procedure and to handle emergency
events [1].
A number of ongoing projects such as CodeBlue, MobiHealth, and iSIM have contributed to establish a proactive and unobtrusive BSN system [2]-[4]. A system architecture presented in [5] performs real time analysis of sensor’s data, provides real
time feedback to the user, and forwards the user’s information to a telemedicine
server. UbiMon aims to develop a smart and an affordable health care system [6].
MIT Media Lab is developing MIThril that gives a complete insight of humanmachine interface [7]. HIT lab focuses on quality interfaces and innovative wearable
computers [8]. IEEE 802.15.6 aims to provide power-efficient in-body and on-body
wireless communication standards for medical and non-medical applications [9].
NASA is developing a wearable physiological monitoring system for astronauts
called LifeGuard system [10]. ETRI focuses on the development of a low power
MAC protocol for a BSN [11].
In this paper, we use the terms BAN Node (BN) and BAN Network Coordinator
(BNC) for the sensor node and the network coordinator in a BSN. The rest of the
paper is organized into six sections. Section 2 presents discussion on BSN traffic
classification. Section 3 and 4 present a brief analysis on in-body and on-body MAC
protocols. Section 5 and 6 discuss the Traffic Based Wakeup Mechanism and the
Bridging function for a BSN. The final section concludes our work.

2 BSN Traffic Classification
The assorted BSN traffic requires sophisticated and power-efficient techniques to
ensure safe and reliable operation. Existing MAC protocols such as SMAC [12],
TMAC [13], IEEE 802.15.4 [14], and WiseMAC [15] give limited answers to the
heterogeneous traffic. The in-body BNs do not appreciate synchronized wakeup periods because they confine the accommodation of sporadic emergency events. Medical
data usually needs high priority and reliability than non-medical data. In case of
emergency events, the BNs should be able to access the channel in less than one second [16]. IEEE 802.15.4 Guaranteed Time Slots (GTS) can be utilized to handle time
critical events but they expire in case of a low traffic. Furthermore, some in-body BNs
have high data transmission frequency than others. We classify the entire BSN traffic
into Normal, On-demand, and Emergency traffic as given in Figure 1. The normal
traffic is further classified into High, Medium, and Low traffic.
(a)- Normal Traffic: Normal traffic is the data traffic in a normal condition with
no time critical and on-demand events. This includes unobtrusive and routine health
monitoring of a patient for diagnosis and treatment of many diseases such as gastrointestinal tract, neurological disorders, cancer detection, handicap rehabilitation, and the
most threatening heart disease. Some BNs have frequent wakeup periods and thus are
designated as high traffic BNs. For example, an ECG node may send data 4 times per

Towards Power Efficient MAC Protocol for In-Body and On-Body Sensor Networks

337

               

Fig. 1. BSN Traffic Classification

hour, while other BNs may send 4 times a day. The ECG node is thus designated as a
high traffic BN. However, the normal traffic classification from high to low and viceversa depends on the application requirements. The normal data is collected and processed by the BNC.
(b)- On-demand Traffic: On-demand traffic is initiated by the BNC or doctor to
know certain information, mostly for the purpose of diagnosis and prescription. This
is further divided into continuous (in case of surgical events) and non-continuous
(when limited information is required).
(c)- Emergency Traffic: This is initiated by BNs when they exceed a predefined
threshold and should be accommodated in less than one second. This kind of traffic is
not generated on regular intervals and is totally unpredictable.

3 MAC for On-Body Sensor Networks
On-body sensor networks comprise of miniaturized and non-invasive sensor nodes
that are used for various applications, ranging from medical to interactive gaming and
entertainment applications. They use Wireless Medical Telemetry Services (WMTS),
unlicensed ISM, and UWB bands for data transmission. WMTS is a licensed band
designated for medical telemetry system. Federal Communication Commission (FCC)
urges the use of WMTS for medical applications due to fewer interfering sources.
However, only authorized users such as physicians and trained technicians are eligible
to use this band. Furthermore, the restricted WMTS (14 MHz) bandwidth cannot
support video and voice transmission. The alternative spectrum for medical applications is to use 2.4 GHz ISM band that includes guard bands to protect adjacent channel interference.
The design and implementation of a power-efficient MAC protocol for on-body
sensor networks have been a hot research topic for the last few years. A novel TDMA
protocol for on-body sensor network called H-MAC exploits the biosignal features to
perform TDMA synchronization and improves the energy efficiency [17]. Other protocols like WASP, CICADA, and BSN-MAC are investigated in [18] – [20]. The

338

S. Ullah, X. An, and K.S. Kwak

Fig. 2. Packet Delivery Ratio of IEEE 802.15.4, PB-TDMA, and SMAC for On-Body Sensor
Networks

performance analysis of a non-beacon IEEE 802.15.4 is adapted to extend lifetime of
a node from 10 to 15 years [21]. This work considers low upload/download rates,
mostly per hour. Furthermore, the data transmission is based on periodic intervals,
which limits the performance to certain applications. There is no reliable support for
on-demand and emergency traffic.
We analyze the performance of a beacon-enabled IEEE 802.15.4, Preamble-Based
TDMA [22], and SMAC protocols for on-body sensor networks. Our analysis is verified by extensive simulation using NS-2[23]. In case of S-MAC, PB-TDMA, and
IEEE 802.11 (DCF) protocols, the wireless physical parameters are considered according to low power Nordic nRF2401 transceiver. This radio transceiver operates in
the 2.4-2.5 GHz band with an optimum transmission power of -5dBm. However, in
case of IEEE 802.15.4, Chipcon CC2420 radio interface is considered. We use shadowing propagation model throughout the simulations. We consider 9 BNs firmly
placed on a human body. The BNs are connected to the BNC in a star topology. The
initial BN energy is 5 Joules. The data rate of the BNs is heterogeneous. The simulation area is 1x1 meter and each BN generates Constant Bit Rate (CBR) traffic. The
packet size is 128 bytes. The transport agent is User Datagram Protocol (UDP). Simulation results show that IEEE 802.15.4, when configured in a beacon-enabled mode,
outperforms SMAC and PB-TDMA as shown in Figure 2. However, the precise location of BNs and the body position influence the packet delivery ratio.
Intel Corporation conducted a series of experiments to analyze the performance of
IEEE 802.15.4 for an on-body sensor network [24]. They deployed a number of Intel
Mote 2 [25] nodes on chest, waist, and the right ankle. Tabel 1 shows the packet success rate at 0dBm transmit power when a person is standing and sitting on a chair.
The connection between ankle and waist cannot be established, even for a short distance of 1.5m. All other connections show favourable performance.
As IEEE 802.15.4 operates in the 2.4 GHz unlicensed band, the possibilities of interference from other devices such as IEEE 802.11 and microwave are inevitable. A
series of experiments to evaluate the impact of IEEE 802.11 and microwave ovens on

Towards Power Efficient MAC Protocol for In-Body and On-Body Sensor Networks

339

Table 1. Packet Success Rate at 0dBm Transmit Power
Packet Success Rate when a Person
is Standing
Destination
Source

Chest
Waist
Ankle

Chest
100%
72%

Packet Success Rate when a Person
is Sitting on an Office Chair

Waist

Ankle

99%

84%
50%

76%

Chest
99%
77%

Waist

Ankle

99%

81%
47%

27%

Table 2. Co-existence Test Results between IEEE 802.15.4 and Microwave Oven
Microwave Status
ON
OFF

Packet Success Rate
Mean
Std.
96.85%
3.22%
100%
0%

the IEEE 802.15.4 transmission are carried out in [26]. They considered XBee
802.15.4 development kit that has two XBee modules. Table 2 shows the effects of
microwave oven on the XBee remote module. When the microwave oven is ON, the
packet success rate and the standard deviation is degraded to 96.85% and 3.22% respectively. However, there is no loss when the XBee modules are taken 2 meters
away from the microwave oven.

4 MAC for In-Body Sensor Networks
The most challenging task in developing a power-efficient MAC for in-body sensor
networks is to accommodate the in-body BNs in a power-efficient manner. Unlike onbody BNs, the in-body BNs are implanted under human skin where the electrical
properties of the body affect the signal propagations. The human body is a medium
that poses many wireless transmission challenges. The body is composed of several
components that are not predictable and will change. Monitoring in-body functions
and the ability to communicate with implanted therapeutic devices, such as pacemakers, are essential for their best use.
Zarlink semiconductor has introduced a wireless chip that supports a very high data
rate RF link for communication with an implantable BN [27]. The ZL70101 ultra-low
power transceiver chip satisfies the power and size requirements for implanted communication systems and operates in 402-405 MHz MICS band [28]-[29]. Other frequency bands such as 916MHz, 1.5GHz, and UWB are also considered for in-body
sensor networks [30]-[32]. The use of open air models for implant communication is
discouraged in [33]. A Finite-Difference Time-Domain (FDTD) is used to calculate the
power deposition in a human head and is measured by the SAR in W/Kg [34]. However, the distance from the implant source has not been discussed. For a duty cycle and
transmission rate of 0.05% and 400 kbps, the SubQore radio architecture from Cambridge university consumes a peak current less than 1.7mA [35]. An implantable medical microsystems for interfaces to the central nervous system is presented in [36].

340

S. Ullah, X. An, and K.S. Kwak

Battery
Energy
Scavenging

External
Coupling
Power
supply
Actuators (ICDs,
Pacemaker)

Inductive Link
Infrared
Analog

Processor
Sensors (Capsula
Endoscope)

Power
Management
Transceiver

Interface

Peripheral
(EMG,EEG)

WMTS, MICS

Fig. 3. Implementation issues in the in-body sensor network

The diverse nature of in-body BNs together with the electrical properties of the
human body influences the development process of a power-efficient MAC for inbody sensor networks. The data rate of implanted BNs varies, ranging from few kbps
in pacemaker to several Mbps in capsular endoscope. Figure 3 explains the in-body
sensor networks and implementation issues. In the in-body sensor network, critical
traffic requires low latency and high reliability than non-critical traffic. One of the
solutions is to adjust initial back-off windows in a traditional CSMA/CA for critical
and non-critical traffic. Due to high path loss inside the human body, the use of
CSMA/CA does not provide reliable solution in multi-piconets [37]. For a threshold
of -85dBm and -95dBm, the on-body BNs cannot see the activity of in-body BNs
when they are away at 3 meters distance from the body surface. However, within 3
meters or less distance, the CCA works correctly in the same piconet.
The in-body MAC should also consider the thermal influence caused by the electromagnetic wave exposure and circuit heat. Nagamine et al. discussed the thermal
influence of the BNs using different MAC protocols [38]. Figure 4 shows the temperature of a BN when ALOHA and CSMA/CA are used.

Fig. 4. Saturated Temperature

Towards Power Efficient MAC Protocol for In-Body and On-Body Sensor Networks

341

5 Traffic Based Wakeup Mechanism for a BSN
The heterogeneous BNs require power-efficient and dynamic wakeup techniques for
reliable operation. We propose a power-efficient technique called Traffic Based
Wakeup Mechanism for a BSN that exploits the traffic patterns of the BNs to accommodate the assorted BSN traffic. The initial wakeup patterns are either predefined (by
the company) or created and modified (by the BNC). Table 3 shows the traffic classification and the corresponding solutions.
Table 3. Solutions to the Classified BSN traffic
On-demand
Traffic

Emergency
Traffic

Send data based on the Trafficbased Wake-up Table

Receives a Wakeup
Radio Signal from
the BNC and respond

Send a Wakeup Radio
Signal to the
BNC in case of
emergency

Send beacons based on the
Traffic- based Wake-up
Table

Send a Wake-up
Radio Signal to
BNs

Traffic

Normal Traffic

Devices

High
BAN Nodes
(BNs)

BAN Coordinator (BNC)

Medium

Low

Receives a
Wake-up
Radio Signal
and respond

The wakeup patterns of all BNs are organized into a table called Traffic Based
Wakeup Table. The table is maintained and modified by the BNC according to the
application requirements. Based on the BNs wakeup patterns, the BNC can also calculate its own wakeup pattern. This could save significant energy at the BNC. The
BNC does not need to stay active when there is no traffic from the BN. The designation of normal traffic levels, i.e, high, medium, and low traffic nodes depend on the
application. For emergency and on-demand traffic, the BNs and the BNC send a
wake-up signal for a very short duration to each other. However, traditional wake-up
radio concepts have several limitations when considered in the in-body sensor networks. They are not able to wake-up a particular BN. All BNs wake-up in response to
a single wake-up signal, which is not the required environment. The use of different
radio frequencies to wake-up a particular BN may provide an optimal solution. However, the use of wakeup radio requires efficient security management schemes.

6 Bridging Function for a BSN
In a BSN, there can be various BNs working on different frequency bands and have
correspondingly different Physical Layers (PHYs). The main problem is how to connect different BNs working on different bands in a BSN. In order to accommodate
multiple PHYs (radio interfaces) and multiple channels, we introduce a function
called Bridging that virtually connects different BNs working on different PHYs.

342

S. Ullah, X. An, and K.S. Kwak

In-body BNs

Controller/BNC

On-body BNs

BSN
MAC

BSN-Bridging-MAC

BSN
MAC

PHY 2
(MICS)

PHY 2 PHY 1
(MICS) (ISM)

PHY 1
(ISM)

Fig. 5. Protocol Stack of the Bridging Function

Bridging function enables one MAC to support multiple bands and multiple PHYs.
One MAC means a common hybrid MAC framework. Furthermore, we use the term
Channel from MAC point of view where one channel is a combination of a frequency
band and the corresponding PHY technique.
The Bridging function is an enhanced MAC function that establishes logical relationships between different PHY BNs. However, the BNs running Bridging function
must have two or more different PHY interfaces in order to work on two or more
different Channels at the same time. All necessary information, i.e, Network Info,
Channel ID (band/PHY), BNs ID, Connection ID and Connection Type (MAC layer),
Source and Destination BNs ID is recorded in a specific table. According to the records in the table, a Channel Mapping is implemented in the intermediate BNs that
support at least two bands/PHYs.
The Bridging function is also regarded as link-layer MAC Protocol Data Unit
(MPDU) relay. The intermediate BNs receive and store data from one channel, and
then forward it on another channel towards the destination. The process is transparent
to upper layers and accommodates different PHY techniques. Figure 5 shows the
protocol stack of the Bridging function.
The BNs implementing the Bridging function (also called a Bridge) can collect or
dissipate data from or to the in-body BNs and communicate with on-body and outbody BNs. The Bridge has two PHY layers, typically unlicensed ISM/UWB Band and
a licensed MICS Band. Generally, on-body/out-body BNs are selected for the Bridging function due to their relative larger capabilities and less stringent channel conditions. The Bridging enables the integration of all BNs into a BSN and realizes the
interconnectivity among different PHY BNs.
The in-body BNs cannot establish a direct communication with on-body BNs due
to power limitations, high path loss, and different PHYs. Therefore, they exploit the
Bridging function and forward all the data frames to the on-body BNs via Bridge.
Moreover, the in-body BNs do not support peer-to-peer transmission in same network, and thus data transmission between in-body BNs are relayed by the Bridge.
Though on-body/out-body BNs can be designated as a Bridge node, but we urge the
use of BNC to perform the Bridging function.

Towards Power Efficient MAC Protocol for In-Body and On-Body Sensor Networks

343

7 Conclusions
In this paper, we studied the behavior of several power-efficient MAC protocols including a beacon-enabled IEEE 802.15.4 protocol for on-body sensor networks. We
concluded that none of the existing MAC protocols accommodate the assorted BSN
traffic requirements in a power-efficient manner. The entire BSN traffic was
classified into normal, on-demand, and emergency traffic. A Traffic Based Wakeup
Mechanism was proposed for a BSN, which exploited the traffic patterns of the BNs
to accommodate the entire traffic classification. We further introduced a Bridging
function that integrated all the BNs working on different PHYs into a complete BSN.
The proposed wakeup mechanism backed by the Bridging function provided a
complete solution towards power-efficient and reliable communication in a BSN.

Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the IT R&D program of MKE/IITA, [2008-F-050-01,
Development of WBAN system for In-body and On-body].

References
1. Otto, C., Milenkovic, A., Sanders, C., Jovanov, E.: System Architecture of a Wireless
Body Area Sensor Network for Ubiquitous Health Monitoring. Journal of Mobile Multimedia 1(4), 307–326 (2006)
2. http://fiji.eecs.harvard.edu/CodeBlue (Date Visited: November 21, 2008)
3. http://www.mobihealth.org/ (Date Visited: January 20, 2009)
4. http://www.cs.uoregon.edu/research/wearables/index.html (Date
Visited: July 21, 2008)
5. Jovanov, E., Milenkovic, A., Otto, C., de Groen, P.: A wireless body area network of intelligent motion sensors for computer assisted physical rehabilitation. Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation 2(6) (March 2005)
6. http://www.ubimon.net (Date Visited: March 16, 2008)
7. http://www.media.mit.edu/wearables/mithril/ (Date Visited: Febuary
09, 2008)
8. http://www.hitl.washington.edu/ (Date Visited: April 25, 2008)
9. http://www.ieee802.org/15/pub/TG6.html (Date Visited: December 16,
2008)
10. http://lifeguard.stanford.edu/ (Date Visited: January 11, 2009)
11. http://www.etri.re.kr/eng/
12. Ye, W., Heidemann, J., Estrin, D.: Medium Access Control with Coordinated Adaptive
Sleeping for Wireless Sensor Networks. IEEE Communications Letters 12(3), 493–506
(2004)
13. Dam, T.V., Langendoen, K.: An Adaptive Energy-Efficient MAC Protocol for Wireless
Sensor Networks. In: SenSys 2003, Los Angeles, pp. 171–180 (2003)
14. IEEE Std.802.15.4: Wireless medium access control (MAC) and physical layer (PHY)
specifications for low data rate wireless personal area networks (WPAN) (2006)

344

S. Ullah, X. An, and K.S. Kwak

15. El-Hoiydi, A., Decotignie, J.-D.: WiseMAC: An Ultra Low Power MAC Protocol for the
Downlink of InfrastructureWireless Sensor Networks. In: The Proceedings of the Ninth
IEEE Symposium on Computers and Communication, ISCC 2004, Alexandria, Egypt, pp.
244–251 (2004)
16. Technical Requirement Document, IEEE 802.15.6 (January 2009)
17. Huaming Li, H., Jindong Tan, H.: Heartbeat Driven Medium Access Control for Body
Sensor Networks. In: Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGMOBILE international workshop
on Systems and networking support for healthcare and assisted living environments, pp.
25–30 (2007)
18. Braem, B., Latre, B., Moerman, I., Blondia, C., Demeester, P.: The Wireless Autonomous
Spanning tree Protocol for multihop wireless body area networks. In: Proceedings of the
First International Workshop on Personalized Networks, San Jose, California, USA (2006)
19. Latre, B., Braem, B., Moerman, I., Blondia, C., Reusens, E., Joseph, W., Demeester, P.: A
Low-delay Protocol for Multihop Wireless Body Area Networks. In: Fourth Annual International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Systems: Networking & Services, MobiQuitous 2007, pp. 1–8, 6–10 (2007)
20. Li, H., Tan, J.: Medium Access Control for Body Sensor Networks. In: Proceedings of
16th International Conference on Computer Communications and Networks, ICCCN 2007,
August 13-16, pp. 210–215 (2007)
21. Timmons, N.F., Scanlon, W.G.: Analysis of the performance of IEEE 802.15.4 for medical
sensor body area networking. In: IEEE SECON (2004)
22. Ullah, S., Islam, R., Nessa, A., Zhong, Y., Sup, K.K.: Performance Analysis of a Preamble
Based TDMA Protocol for Wireless Body Area Network. Journal of Communications
Software and Systems 4(3), 222–226 (2008)
23. http://www.isi.edu/nsnam/ns/ (Date visited: March 26, 2008)
24. Shah, R.C., Yarvis, M.: Characteristics of on-body 802.15.4 networks. In: 2nd IEEE
Workshop on Wireless Mesh Networks, WiMesh 2006, September 25-28, pp. 138–139
(2006)
25. Adler, R., et al.: Intel Mote 2: An advanced platform for demanding sensor network applications, Demo session, Sensys (2005)
26. Chen, C., Pomalaza-Ráez, C.: Monitoring Human Movements at Home Using Wearable
Wireless Sensors. In: ISMICT 2009, Montreal, February 24-27 (2009)
27. Ullah, S., Higgin, H., Kwak, K.S.: A study of implanted and wearable body sensor networks. In: Nguyen, N.T., Jo, G.S., Howlett, R.J., Jain, L.C. (eds.) KES-AMSTA 2008.
LNCS, vol. 4953, pp. 464–473. Springer, Heidelberg (2008)
28. http://products.zarlink.com/productprofiles/ZL70101.htm (Date
Visited: December 21, 2008)
29. MICS Band. Australian Communications Agency Paper SP 6/03 (October 2003)
30. Scanlon, W.G., Buirns, J.B., Evans, N.E.: Radiowave propagation from a tissue-implanted
source at 418MHz and 916.5MHz. IEEE Trans. on Biomedical Engineering 47(4), 527–
534 (2000)
31. Wang, J., Su, D.: Design of an Ultra-wideband system for in-body wireless communications. In: 4th Asia-Pacific conference on Enviromental Electromagnectic, pp. 565–568
(2006)
32. Kim, J., Rahmat-Samii, Y.: Electromagnetic interactions between biological tissues and
implantable biotelemetry systems. In: IEEE Inter. Microwave Symposium, pp. 1801–1804
(2005)

Towards Power Efficient MAC Protocol for In-Body and On-Body Sensor Networks

345

33. Gupta, S.K.S., Lalwani, S., Prakash, Y., et al.: Towards a propagation model for wireless
biomedical applications. In: IEEE international conference on communications, vol. 3, pp.
1993–1997 (2003)
34. Pandit, V., McDermott, R., Lazzi, G., Furse, C., Gandhi, O.: Electrical Energy Absorption
in the Human Head From a Cellular Telephone. In: Proceedings of the 7th conference on
Visualization (1996)
35. Cambridge Consultants, New radioarchitecture meets medical implant designers’ needs for
higher performance and longer life (2005)
36. Wise, K.D., Anderson, D.J., Hetke, J.F., Kipke, D.R., Najafi, K.: Wireless implantable microsystems: high-density electronic interfaces to the nervous system. Proc. IEEE 92(1),
76–97 (2004)
37. Shu, F., Dolmans, G.: QoS Support in Wireless BANs, IEEE P802.15 Working Group for
Wireless Personal Area Networks, WPANs (November 2008)
38. Zhen, B., Li, H.-B., Kohno, R.: IEEE body area networks and medical implant communications. In: Proceedings of the ICST 3rd International Conference on Body Area Networks, Tempe, Arizona (2008)

