A Study of Implanted and Wearable Body Sensor
Networks
Sana Ullah1, Henry Higgin2, M. Arif Siddiqui1, and Kyung Sup Kwak1
1
Graduate School of Telecommunication Engineering
253 Yonghyun-Dong, Nam-Gu, 402-751, Inha University Incheon South Korea
sanajcs@hotmail.com, arif.sid@hotmail.com, kskwak@inha.ac.kr
2
Zarlink Semiconductor Company
Caldicot NP26 5YW United Kingdom
henry.higgins@zarlink.com

Abstract. Recent advances in intelligent sensors, microelectronics and integrated
circuit, system-on-chip design and low power wireless communication introduced the development of miniaturised and autonomous sensor nodes. These tiny
sensor nodes can be deployed to develop a proactive Body Sensor Network
(BSN). The rapid advancement in ultra low-power RF (radio frequency) technology enables invasive and non-invasive devices to communicate with a remote
station. This communication revolutionizes healthcare system by enabling long
term health monitoring of a patient and providing real time feedback to the
medical experts. In this paper, we present In-body and On-body communication
networks with a special focus on the methodologies of wireless communication
between implanted medical devices with external monitoring equipment and recent technological growth in both areas. We also discuss about open issues and
challenges in a BSN.
Keywords: Body Sensor Network, Wireless Body Area Network, Implanted
Communication, Wearable Computing.

1 Introduction
The leading cause of death in US is heart disease, i.e. about 652,486 and 150,074
people died due to cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases [1]. In South Korea,
17% people die due to cerebrovascular diseases [2]. The health care expenditure in
US is expected to reach 2.9 trillion by 2009 and 4 trillion by 2015, or 20% of Gross
Domestic Product (GDP) [3]. Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death
and it accounts for approximately 30% of all deaths worldwide [4]. In UK, it is 39%
of all deaths [5]. In Europe, 90% of people die due to arrhythmogenic event [6]. Irregular heart beat causes such deaths and can be monitored before heart attack. Holter
monitors are used to collect cardio rhythm disturbances for offline processing without
real time feedback. Transient abnormalities are sometimes hard to capture. For instance, many cardiac diseases are associated with episodic rather than continuous
abnormalities such as transient surges in blood pressure, paroxysmal arrhythmias or

A Study of Implanted and Wearable Body Sensor Networks

465

induced episodes of myocardial ischemia and their time cannot be predicted [6]. The
accurate prediction of these episodes improves the quality of life.
Body Sensor Network (BSN) is a key technology to prevent the occurrence of
myocardial infarction, monitoring episodic events or any other abnormal condition
and can be used for long term monitoring of patients. The term BSN is first coined by
Prof Guang-Zhong Yang of imperial college London. A BSN consists of miniaturised,
low power and noninvasive or invasive wireless biosensors, which are seamlessly
placed on or implanted in human body in order to provide an adaptable and smart
healthcare system. This seamless integration of small and intelligent wireless sensors
is used to monitor the patient's vital signs, provide real time feedback and can be a
part of diagnostic procedure, maintenance of chronic condition, supervised recovery
from a surgical procedure and to monitor effect of drugs therapy [7]. Each tiny biosensor is capable of processing its own task and communicates with a network coordinator or PDA. The network coordinator sends patient information to a remote server
for further analysis. Episodic examination of a patient captures a snapshot of recovery
process and skips other potential complications [8]. A BSN focuses on early detection
of life threatening abnormalities and maintenance of chronic condition [9]. Long term
monitoring of patient activities under natural physiological states improves quality of
life by allowing patients to engage in normal daily life activities, rather than staying at
home or hospital [10]. Moreover, implants for therapeutic and diagnostic purposes are
also becoming more common. They can be used to restore control over paralyzed
limbs, enable bladder and bowel muscle control, maintain regular heart rhythm, and
many other functions. These implants significantly improve the quality of life of
many patients. Though BSN research is in inception, but a number of on going research has enabled the innovation of several prototypes for unobtrusive pervasive
healthcare system. However, no standard exists for a BSN due to considerable number of issues and challenges such as interoperability, privacy and security, low power
communication, biosensor design, baseline power consumption, communication link
between the implanted device and external monitoring and control equipment. The
scope of a BSN spans around three domains: Off-body communication, On-body
communication and In-body communication. Off-body communication is the communication from the base station to the transceiver on human side. On-body communication is the communication within on-body networks and wearable system. In-body
communication is the communication between invasive or implantable devices with a
base station.
The rest of the paper is divided into four categories. Section 2 contains a detailed
discussion on invasive or in-body communication with a special focus on the methodologies of wireless communication between implanted medical devices with external
monitoring equipment. This includes discussion on inductive coupling, in-body RF
communication and antenna design. Section 3 presents a brief discussion on noninvasive or on-body communication and the recent technological growth in this area.
Section 4 contains discussion on multi-agent technology for a BSN. Section 5 focuses
on open issues and challenges in a BSN. Finally, we present conclusion to our work.

466

S. Ullah et al.

2 In-Body Communication
Advancement in implant technology and RF communication has enabled the communication of invasive or implanted device with a remote base station and can monitor
every aspect of a patient. These new implant technologies require a communication
link between the in-body device and external monitoring and control equipment. Zarlink semiconductor has introduced the world's first wireless chip, which supports a
very high data rate RF link for communication with an implantable device [11]. The
ZL70101 ultra-low power transceiver chip satisfies the power and size requirements
for implanted communication systems and operates in 402-405 MHz Medical Implantable Communications Service (MICS) band [12].
There are several ways to communicate with a human body implant, including
methods that use electromagnetic induction (similar to radio frequency identification,
or RFID) and the others that use radio frequency (RF). Both are wireless and their use
will depend on applications.
2.1 Inductive Coupling
Several applications still use electromagnetic coupling to provide a communication
link to implanted devices, with an external coil held very close to the patient that
couples to a coil implanted just below the skin surface. The implant is powered by the
coupled magnetic field and requires no battery for communication. As well as providing power, this alternating field is also be used to transfer data into the implant. Data
is transferred from the implanted device by altering the impedance of the implanted
loop that is detected by the external coil and electronics. This type of communication
is commonly used to identify animals that have been injected with an electronic tag.
Electromagnetic induction is used when continuous, long-term communication is
required.
The base band for electromagnetic communication is typically 13.56 MHz or 28
MHz, with other frequencies also available. Its use is subject to regulation for maximum Specific Absorption Rate (SAR). Inductive coupling achieves the best power
transfer when using large transmit and receive coils, meaning it's impractical when
space is an issue or devices are implanted deep within the patient. This technique does
not support a very high data rate and cannot initiate a communication session from
inside of the body. Please read Finkenzeller et.al [13] for further details.
2.2 In-Body RF-Communication
Compared with inductive coupling, RF communication dramatically increases bandwidth and enables a two-way data link to be established. The Medical Implant Communication Service (MICS) band of 403 MHz to 405 MHz is gaining worldwide acceptance for in-body use [14]. This band has a power limit of 25 µW in air and is split
into 300 kHz wide channels. The human body is a medium that poses numerous wireless transmission challenges. The body is composed of varied components that are not
predictable and will change as the patient ages, gains or loses weight, or even changes
posture. There are formulas for designing free-air communications but it's very difficult to calculate performance for an in-body communication system. To compound

A Study of Implanted and Wearable Body Sensor Networks

467

the design challenge, the location of the implanted device is also variable. During
surgery the implant is placed in the best position to perform its primary function, with
little consideration for wireless performance.
Typical dielectric constant ( ε r ), conductivity ( ρ ) and characteristic impedance

Z 0 (Ω) properties of muscle and fat are shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Body Electrical Properties

Frequency
100
400
900

Muscle
(εr )

ρ (S.m-1)

Z 0 (Ω)

Fat
(εr )

ρ

0.73
0.82
0.97

31.6
43.7
48.2

12.7
11.6
11.3

0.07
0.08
0.11

66.2
58
56

Z 0 (Ω)
92.4
108
111

The dielectric constant has an effect on the wavelength of a signal. In air the wavelength can be found from Equation 1 where ε r = 1 . However in a different medium the
wavelength is reduced as in Equation 2.

λ = 300

106
f

(1)

where λ is the wavelength in air in meters and f is frequency in Hz.

λmedium =

λ
εr

(2)

where λmedium is the wavelength in medium.
At 403 MHz the wavelength in air is 744 mm, but in muscle with ε r = 50 the
λmedium = 105 mm. This is of considerable help in designing implanted antennas where
physical size is an important consideration. The conductivity of muscle is 0.82Sm-1 –
this is more than air, which is almost zero. The effect of this is similar to surrounding
the implant with seawater that will attenuate the signal as it passes through. This results in reduced penetration. The characteristic impedance ( Z o ) is relevant when it
changes, such as at the fat-muscle boundary. This will cause part of the signal to be
reflected by a term known as reflection co-coefficient Г, found from Equation 3.
Γ=

Zo − Zr
Zo + Zr

(3)

where Z o is the impedance of free space (377 Ω), and Z r is the impedance of medium
in Ω. This results in a signal being reflected of magnitude Г of incident signal power.
So for muscle-fat boundary Г = 80% of the signal is reflected. As an implant does not
have an earth (ground), the case or other wires will also radiate. This means that

468

S. Ullah et al.

signals will be radiated from the antenna and other structures associated with the
implant. More details are available in Yang et.al [15].
2.3 Antenna Design

An in-body antenna needs to tuneable, using an intelligent transceiver and routine.
This will enable the antenna coupling circuit to be optimised and the best signal
strength obtained. Often size constraints dictate the choice of a non-resonant antenna.
A non-resonant antenna will have lower gain and therefore be less sensitive on receiving and radiate less of the power generated by the transmitter. This makes design of
the antenna coupling circuit even more important.
A patch antenna can be used when the implant is flat and there is no room to deploy a short wire. Patch antennas comprise a flat substrate coated on both sides with
conductor. The substrate is typically alumina or a similar body-compatible material,
with platinum or platinum/iridium coating both surfaces. The upper surface is the
active face and is connected to the transceiver. The connection to the transceiver
needs to pass through the case where the hermetic seal is maintained, requiring a feedthrough. The feed-through must have no filter capacitors present; these are common
on other devices. A patch antenna will be electrically larger than its physical size
because it will be immersed in a high ε r medium. It can be made to appear even
larger electrically if the substrate is of high ε r . The off-resonance antennas have low
radiation resistance, typically in the order of a few Ohms for a patch. A loop antenna
is an option where it can be deployed attached to the implant case. The loop antenna
operates mostly with the magnetic field, whereas the patch operates mostly with the
electric field. The loop antenna delivers comparable performance to that of a dipole,
but with a considerably smaller size. Also the magnetic permeability of muscle or fat
is very similar to that of air, unlike the dielectric constant that varies considerably.
This property enables an antenna to be built and used with much less need for retuning. A loop antenna can be mounted on the case in a biocompatible structure. Equations 4 and 5 relate to small and large loops, other equations exist for multi-turn loop
designs.

(

Rrad = 31200 A / λ 2

)

2

A ≤ λ 2 /100

(4)

where Rrad is radiation resistance and A is the loop area and λ the wavelength in medium.

(

Rrad = 3270 A / λ 2

)

2

A > λ 2 /100

(5)

More details of antenna design can be found from Kraus [16] Fujimoto [17], Lee [18],
and Krall [19]. The performance of an implanted communication system within a
body is difficult to predict or simulate. Approximation to a human body can be made
with a body phantom liquid as described in the book edited by Yang [15]. Unlike
applications in air, there are no reliable equations to use and therefore only limited
simulation models. That said, simulation can provide a guide to the propagation from
a body but should not be used to guarantee performance.

A Study of Implanted and Wearable Body Sensor Networks

469

3 On-Body Communication
The rapid growth in intelligent sensors, microelectronics and integrated circuit, system-on-chip design, and low power wireless communication has introduced the development of miniaturized and non-invasive sensor nodes. These non-invasive sensor
nodes can be placed on human body to create an on-body communication network,
which can be used for ambulatory health monitoring of a patient. Unlike in-body
communication where the devices are implanted in human body, in on-body communication network, the tiny sensors are placed on the body with out implantation, which
provides long term health monitoring and prevents the occurrence of life threatening
events. The information is gathered into a central intelligent node or PDA, which also
provides an interface to the patient as well as communicates with a remote server. A
BSN usually consists of three levels [20]. The first level is called sensor level, which
consists of miniaturised low power sensors such as ECG (electrocardiogram), SpO2
(oxygen saturation sensor), EMG (electromyography) and EEG (electroencephalography). The second level called PDA or central intelligent node collects patient information and communicates with the remote station. The third level consists of a remote
base station, which keeps patient medical records and provides diagnostic recommendations [20].The GPRS system is used to track the patient's location. A number of
on-going projects such as CodeBlue [21], MobiHealth [22] and Connect [23] have
facilitated research in on-body communication networks. A system architecture of
wireless body area network is presented in [20], where existing Telos platform with
an integrated wireless ZigBee compliant radio with on-board antenna is modified by
adding ISMP (Intelligent signal processing module) component. This architecture
performs real time analysis of sensors data, provides feedback to the user and forwards the user's information to a telemedicine server. A project called Ubiquitous
Monitoring Environment for Wearable and Implantable Sensors (UbiMon) aims to
develop a smart and affordable health care system and is designed by using six components: the sensors, the remote sensing units, the local processing units, the central
server, the patient database, and the workstation [24]. A BSN node for on-body network is developed during this project. The BSN node provides a versatile environment for pervasive healthcare applications and requires 0.01mA in active mode.The
BSN node uses IEEE 802.15.4 (Zigbee) wireless link as a low power communication
protocol. However, the narrowband implementation doesn't satisfy the energy consumption budget of the sensor nodes and hence, an alternative solution is required.
The emerging UWB technology is considered to be the best alternative solution,
which could reduce the baseline power consumption of sensor nodes. A pulse-based
UWB scheme for on-body communication networks [25],UWB channel measurement
with antennas placed on human body [26] and UWB antennas for a BSN [27] have
urged researchers to consider UWB technology for communication within on-body
networks.

4 Multi-agent Technology for BSN
In case of critical condition, the patient's data should be transferred to a remote server
for diagnosis and prescription. This requires the development of smart multi-agent

470

S. Ullah et al.

system for healthcare services. In most of the projects such as Mobihealth [22],
Politechnico[28] and Tele-medicare [29], the patient's medical information are extracted from PDA and forwarded to a central server in hospital using subsequent
multi-agent operations. A multi-agent architecture proposed in [30] uses ontology
based mobile agent for real time diagnosis. A multi-agent based healthcare system
(MAHS) is presented in [31], which is mainly divided into three areas: BSN, Surrogate System and hospital subsystem. The surrogate system connects BSN and hospital
subsystem. This multi-agent system is divided into five main agents: Patient Monitoring Agent (PMA), Gate Agent (GA), Supervisor Agent (SA), Manager Agent (MA)
and Doctor Agent (DA). The combined operation of these agents provides patient
monitoring, real time feedback to the patient and emergency management. PMA collects data from miniaturised sensors and forwards to surrogate system via SA. GA
verifies patient's authentication for his requests. SA controls the surrogate system.
MA controls the hospital subsystem. DA provides diagnosis and prescription based on
the collected data to PMA. All these multi-agent systems for pervasive health care
services require further investigation. The management of the huge amount of patient's data and determining patient's condition based on collected data is a challenging issue and requires advance data mining techniques.

5 Open Issues and Challenges
A proactive BSN system requires the resolution of many technical issues and challenges such as biosensor design, power scavenging issue, low power RF data paths,
scalability, fault tolerance, low power communication protocol, mobility, interoperability, security and privacy. In on-body communication networks, biocompatibility is
the most important issue. The biosensor is often placed on human body and its reliability is relied on the interface between the sensor and tissue or blood [32]. A number of biosensors are developed such as ECG sensor based on Telos platform [33],
SpO2 sensor and ECG sensor based on a BSN node [34], DNA sensor [26], 3D accelerometers and gyroscope [23] and piezoresistive shear stress sensor [35]. Another
important factor is battery life. The solution of some technical issues such as sensor
design, RF design and low power MAC protocol contributes to extend the battery life.
Lithium based batteries can operate at 1400-3600J/cc and provide long period of
operation i.e. from few months to years [36]. A recently developed Sony product "Bio
Battery" which generates electricity from sugar can be a promising candidate to solve
the power scavenging issue [37]. IMEC developed a thermal micro power generator,
which converts thermal energy to electrical energy [38]. The radio interface is also a
major challenge and its power consumption in a BSN must be reduced below the
energy scavenging limit (100 micro Watt) [25].
The current sensors nodes are mostly based on RF circuit design. Reducing the
power consumption of RF transceiver plays a significant role in increasing the lifetime of a sensor. UWB technology is the best solution to increase the operating period
of sensors. However the Power Spectral Density (PSD) must be calibrated inside the
Federal Communication Commission (FCC) mask for indoor applications. The tiny
biosensors wirelessly transmit the collected information to the central intelligent node.
Design of a low power and secure communication protocol for a BSN is the most

A Study of Implanted and Wearable Body Sensor Networks

471

important issue. HTTP protocol is designed to transfer data to remote base station
[39]. Chipcon CC2420 uses IEEE 802.15.4 (ZigBee) wireless link for transmitting
physiological data between sensors. A cross layer protocol (MAC/Network layer)
called Wireless Autonomous Spanning Tree Protocol (WASP) is presented where a
spanning tree is set up autonomously and the network traffic is controlled by broadcasting scheme messages over the tree [40]. An extended version of WASP protocol
called Cascading Information Retrieval by Controlling Access with Distributed Slot
Assignment (CICADA) is presented, which guarantees low delay and good resilience
to mobility [41].

6 Conclusions and Future Prospects
A Body Sensor Network (BSN) consists of miniaturised, invasive and non-invasive,
low power autonomous sensor nodes, which are seamlessly placed on or implanted in
human body in order to provide an adaptable and smart healthcare system. A successful BSN system requires the resolution of many technical issues and challenges,
which includes but not limited to interoperability, QoS, privacy and security, low
power RF data paths, power scavenging issue, biosensor design, scalability and mobility. Moreover, in implant communication, the implant transceiver needs to be sensitive on receive with the ability to tune the antenna for best response. In this paper,
we briefly discussed In-body and On-body communication networks. We talked about
the methodologies of wireless communication between implanted medical devices
with external monitoring equipment. Moreover, we presented a comprehensive discussion on on-body communication networks with a special focus on the recent technological trend in this area. Technical issues and challenges in BSN have also been
discussed. Future applications include smart health care services, remote diagnostic
and telemedicine, wearable technology to monitor vital signs, smart nursing homes,
emergency communication and patient's data maintenance. The broadband signaling
scheme such as UWB is a promising candidate to satisfy power consumption budget
of sensor nodes and is under investigation in different research institutes. To enable
uplink communication from sink to nodes, the WASP and CICADA need to be
improved.

References
1. http://thecommunityguide.org/nchs/fastats/lcod.htm
2. http://www.who.int/whosis/mort/profiles/mortwprokorrepofkorea.
pdf
3. Borger, C., et al.: Health Spending Projections Through 2015: Changes on the Horizon. In:
Health Affairs Web Exclusive W61 (February 22, 2006)
4. http://www.innovationmagazine.com/innovation/volumes/v7n3/
feature2.shtml
5. Barroso, A., Benson, J., et al.: The DSYS25 sensor platform. In: Proceedings of the ACM
sensys 2004 (2004)

472

S. Ullah et al.

6. Lo, B., Yang, G.Z.: Key Technical Challenges and Current Implementations of Body Sensor Networks. In: IEE Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Body Sensor
Networks (BSN 2005), pp. 1–5 (April 2005)
7. Otto, C., Milenkovic, A., Sanders, C., Jovanov, E.: System Architecture of a Wireless
Body Area Sensor Network for Ubiquitous Health Monitoring. Journal of Mobile Multimedia 1(4), 307–326 (2006)
8. Lo, B., Atallah, L., Aziz, O., ElHelw, M., Darzi, A., Yang, G.Z.: Real time pervasive
monitoring for post operative care. In: BSN 2007, Aachen, Germany (2007)
9. Lo, B., Yang, G.Z.: Architecture for Body Sensor Networks. In: IEE Proceedings of the
Perspective in Pervasive Computing, October 25, 2005, pp. 23–28 (2005)
10. Milenkovic, A., Otto, C., Jovanov, E.: Wireless Sensor Networks for Personal Health
Monitoring: Issues and an Implementation. Computer Communications 29, 2521–2533
(2006)
11. Sivard, A., Bradlet, P., et al.: The challenge of designing in-body communications, Embedded Systems Desing 10/26/04, 05:16 PM EDT
12. http://products.zarlink.com/productprofiles/ZL70101.htm
13. Finkenzeller, K.: RFID Handbook, 2nd edn. Wiley International, Chichester (2003)
14. MICS Band. Australian Communications Agency Paper SP 6/03 (October 2003)
15. Yang, et al.: Body Sensor Networks. Springer, Heidelberg (2006)
16. Kraus, J.D.: Antennas, 2nd edn. McGraw Hill, New York (1988)
17. Lee, F.L., Wei, C.: Microstrip and Printed Antennas, 1st edn. Wiley, Chichester (1997)
18. Fujimoto, K., Henderson, A., Hirasawa, K., James, J.R.: Small Antennas, 1987 Research
Studies Press, 16 Coach House Cloisters, 10 Hitchin Street, Baldok, Hertfordshire, SG7
6AE, UK (1987)
19. Krall, A.D., McCorkle, J.M., Scarzello, J.F., Syeles, A.M.: The Omni Microstrip Antenna:
A New Small Antenna. IEEE Trans. Antennas and Propagation AP27, 850–853 (1979)
20. Jovanov, E., Milenkovic, A., Otto, C., de Groen, P.: A wireless body area network of intelligent motion sensors for computer assisted physical rehabilitation. Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation 2(6) (March 1, 2005)
21. http://www.eecs.harvard.edu/mdw/proj/codeblue/
22. http://www.mobihealth.org/
23. http://www.cs.wustl.edu/jain/cse574-06/ftp/medicalwireless/
index.html
24. http://www.ubimon.net
25. Ryckaert, J., Fort, A., Gyselinckx, B.: Ultra-wideband communication for wireless body
area networks. In: International Workshop on UWB Technologies - IWUWBT (2005)
26. http://www.imec.be/
27. Zasowski, T., Althaus, F., Stager, M., Wittneben, A., Troster, G.: Uwb for non invasive
wireless body area networks:channel measurements and results. In: IEEE Conference on
Ultra Wideband Systems and Technologies, UWBST 2003, Reston, Virginia, USA (November 2003)
28. Winnem, O.M., Walderhaug, S.: TeleMediCare Project, SINTEF Telecom and Informatics
(2002)
29. Ouchi, K., Suzuki, T., Doi, M.: LifeMinder: A Wearable Healthcare Support System Using
User’s Context. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ICDCSW 2002 (2003)
30. Kim, S.: Ubiquitous Healthcare: The OnkoNet Mobile Agents Architecture, NODe, pp.
265–277 (2003)

A Study of Implanted and Wearable Body Sensor Networks

473

31. Kang, E., Im, Y., Kim, U.: Remote Control Multi-Agent System for u-Healthcare Service.
In: Nguyen, N.T., Grzech, A., Howlett, R.J., Jain, L.C. (eds.) KES-AMSTA 2007. LNCS
(LNAI), vol. 4496, pp. 636–644. Springer, Heidelberg (2007)
32. Lo, B., Yang, G.Z.: Key Technical Challenges and Current Implementations of Body Sensor Networks. In: IEE Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Body Sensor
Networks (BSN 2005), April 2005, pp. 1–5 (2005)
33. http://www.ece.uah.edu/jovanov/whrms/
34. http://vip.doc.ic.ac.uk/bsn/m185.html
35. Hsieh, M.C., Fang, Y.K., Ju, M.S., Chen, G.S., Ho, J.J., Yang, C.H., Wu, P.M., Wu, G.S.,
Chen, T.Y.: A BioMEMS Review: MEMS Technology for Physiologically Integrated Devices. J. Microelectromech. Syst. 10, 121–127
36. Yeatman, E.M.: Advances In Power Sources For Wireless Sensor Nodes. In: Proceedings
of the 1st International Workshop on Wearable and Implantable Body Sensor Networks,
April 6-7 (2004)
37. http://www.sony.net/SonyInfo/News/Press/200708/07-074E/
index.html
38. http://www.imec.be/wwwinter/research/en/human/ambulatoryeeg.
pdf
39. Dokovsky, N., van Halteren, A., Widya, I.: BANip: enabling remote healthcare monitoring
with Body Area Networks. In: Guelfi, N., Astesiano, E., Reggio, G. (eds.) FIDJI 2003.
LNCS, vol. 2952, pp. 62–72. Springer, Heidelberg (2004)
40. Braem, B., Latre, B., Moerman, I., Blondia, C., Demeester, P.: The Wireless Autonomous
Spanning tree Protocol for multihop wireless body area networks. In: Proceedings of the
First International Workshop on Personalized Networks, ICST, San Jose, California, USA
(2006)
41. Latre, B., Braem, B., Moerman, I., Blondia, C., Reusens, E., Joseph, W., Demeester, P.: A
Low-delay Protocol for Multihop Wireless Body Area Networks, Ghent University IMEC

