MAC Hurdles in Body Sensor Networks
Sana Ullah1, Pervez Khan1, Young-Woo Choi2, Hyung-Soo Lee2, and Kyung Sup Kwak1
1

Graduate School of IT and Telecommunications, Inha University
253 Yonghyun-Dong, Nam-Gu, Incheon 402-751, South Korea.
E-mail. sanajcs@hotmail.com, pervaizkanju@hotmail.com, kskwak@inha.ac.kr
2

Electronics and Telecommunication Research Institute
1104-302 YeolMae Apt., Noeun-Dong, Yusung-Gu, Daejeon, South Korea
ywchoi@etri.re.kr , hsulee@etri.re.kr

Abstract ⎯ The last few decades have seen considerable
research progress in microelectronics and integrated circuits,
system-on-chip design, wireless communication, and sensor
technology. This progress has enabled the seamless integration of
autonomous wireless sensor nodes around a human body to
create a Body Sensor Network (BSN). The development of a
proactive and ambulatory BSN induces a number of enormous
issues and challenges. This paper presents the technical hurdles
during the design and implementation of a low-power Medium
Access Control (MAC) protocol for in-body and on-body sensor
networks. We analyze the performance of IEEE 802.15.4
protocol for the on-body sensor network. We also provide a
comprehensive insight into the heterogeneous characteristics of
the in-body sensor network. A low-power technique called
Pattern-Based Wake-up Table is proposed to handle the normal
traffic in a BSN. The proposed technique provides a reliable
solution towards low-power communication in the in-body
sensor network.
Keywords ⎯ MAC, BSN, WBAN, In-body, On-body

1. Introduction
The remote monitoring of body status, and the surrounding
environment, are becoming more important for sporting
activities, the safety of members of the emergency services,
members of the military and health care. The levels of fitness
required for the very competitive international sporting events
require athletes to be at the very pinnacle of fitness with every
muscle used to its utmost. Furthermore, many body functions
are traditionally monitored only rarely and separated by a
considerable period of time. This can give a very incomplete
picture of what is really happening. Consider a patient visiting
a doctor for a blood pressure check; he/she may be anxious
and thus have elevated pressure resulting in an inaccurate
diagnosis. If, however, the patient can be fitted with a simple
monitoring system that requires no intervention, then a picture
can be built up of how the pressure changes through the day
when he/she goes about their normal business. This will give a
better picture of what is happening and remove inaccurate
results caused by going to visit the doctor. To achieve these
requirements, monitoring of movement and body function are
essential. This monitoring requires the sensors and wireless

system to be very lightweight and to be integrated
un-obtrusively into the clothing.
A Body Sensor Network (BSN) allows the integration of
intelligent, miniaturized, low power, invasive and
non-invasive sensor nodes to monitor body function and the
surrounding environment. Each intelligent node has enough
capability to process and forward information to a base station
for diagnosis and prescription. A BSN provides long term
health monitoring of patients under natural physiological
states without constraining their normal activities. It can be
used to develop a smart and affordable health care system and
can be a part of diagnostic procedure, maintenance of chronic
condition, supervised recovery from a surgical procedure and
to handle emergency events [1]. Monitoring emergency
services and the military both have similar requirements. They
both may have individuals out of sight and in danger such that
rescue is needed. They both need easy to use devices that will
reliably transmit data without getting in the way of the prime
function. The scope of a BSN spans around three domains;
Off-body communication, On-body communication and
In-body communication. Off-body communication is the
communication from the base station to the transceiver on
human side. On-body communication is the communication
with on-body networks and wearable system. In-body
communication is the communication between invasive or
implantable devices and external monitoring equipment.
Monitoring in-body functions and the ability to communicate
with an implanted therapeutic device, such as a pacemaker, are
essential for its best use. Applications include monitoring and
programme changes for pacemakers and implantable cardiac
defibrillators, control of bladder function and restoration of
limb movement. The space within a body is very limited and
the available materials are few. These applications may
require continuous or occasional one or two-way transmission.
Some applications will require a battery where the current
drain must be low so as not to reduce the working life of the
implant function. If the data transfer is small and only
occasional then an “RFID” technique can be employed. This is
relevant for an intracranial pressure monitor.
The development of an affordable BSN induces a number of
issues and challenges such as interoperability, scalability,
Quality of Service (QoS), and energy efficient communication.
There are various low-power techniques to ensure energy

efficient communication in a wireless sensor network such as
fixed duty cycling technique in SMAC [2] and wake-up slots
in TDMAW [3]. However, they are not energy efficient in case
of a heterogeneous BSN. In this paper, we discuss the
technical hurdles in the development of an energy efficient
low-power MAC protocol for in-body and on-body sensor
networks.
The following paper is divided into four sections. Section 2
presents a general discussion on MAC protocol for a BSN.
Section 3 and 4 present a brief analysis on in-body and
on-body MAC protocols. The final section concludes our
work.

2. BSN-MAC
Unlike SMAC and TMAC [4], the traffic characteristics in a
Body Sensor Network (BSN) vary from periodic to
non-periodic and vice versa. The concept of fixed duty cycling
technique gives limited answer when it comes to the
heterogeneous behavior of autonomous sensor nodes in a BSN.
The dynamic nature of these nodes does not urge synchronized
periodic wakeup periods.
Some nodes, e.g.,
electrocardiogram (ECG), may send data at 1/hour rate to the
coordinator, while other may send data twice in a week. These
nodes should also have the capabilities to sense and transmit
emergency information. The data is classified into three
categories, i.e., Normal Traffic, On-Demand Traffic, and
Emergency Traffic. Figure 1 shows the MAC mapping of
classified data before transmission.

Figure 1. Traffic Classification

The BSN MAC protocol is required to accommodate the
entire traffic classification in a sophisticated manner. Most of
the well-known low-power MAC protocols such as IEEE
802.15.4 [5], SMAC, TMAC, and WiseMAC [6] cannot
accommodate these diverse traffic requirements. They give
limited answers in terms of energy efficiency and reliability.
Furthermore, they cannot handle both medical and
non-medical BSN applications. Medical data usually needs
high priority and reliability than non-medical data. Time
critical event needs highest reliability. IEEE 802.15.4
Guaranteed Time Slot (GTS) can be utilized to handle time
critical events but they expire in case of low traffic.
The IEEE 802.15.6 aims to provide low-power in-body
and on-body wireless communication standard for medical
and non-medical applications [7]. On-body sensor network
has an immediate market demand and is easy to standardize
without considering the in-body communication. The
committee has suggested four options to design MAC and
PHY layer for a BSN.

1- To define MAC and PHY standard for on-body
communication to serve immediate market needs. A slight
modification to the existing MAC standard with an alternative
PHY layer for in-body communication is also suggested.
2- To define MAC and PHY only for on-body
communication to serve immediate market needs.
3- To define MAC and PHY only for in-body
communication.
4- To define MAC and PHY for in-body and on-body
communication simultaneously regardless of their affects on
the availability of specification.
Splitting the task group into two groups only for multiple
PHY layer is not an attractive approach. We can define two
different PHY’s in one standard addressing different
requirement as illustrated in Figure 2. However, in-body and
on-body communications have different lead times to standard
completion.

BSN MAC
MICS Band

ISM/UWB

Figure 2. One MAC and Multi PHY

3. On-Body MAC
On-body sensor networks comprise of non-invasive sensor
nodes used for various applications, ranging from medical to
interactive gaming and entertainment applications. They use
Industrial, Scientific, and Medical (ISM) or Ultra Wide Band
(UWB) band for data transmission. A performance analysis of
IEEE 802.15.4 standard has been presented in [8], where a star
network configuration with a non-beacon enabled mode has
been adapted to prolong lifetime of nodes from 10 to 15 years.
However, in a non-beacon enabled mode, the coordinator
cannot communicate with the nodes until invited by them. In a
beacon-enabled mode, the coordinator can initiate the
communication with the nodes but all nodes must wake up to
receive the beacon frames, which is not suitable for a BSN
where some nodes do not always send the data.
We analyze the performance of IEEE 802.15.4
(beacon-enabled mode), Preamble-Based TDMA [9], and
SMAC protocols for on-body sensor networks. Our analysis is
verified by extensive simulation using NS-2[10]. Simulation
results show that IEEE 802.15.4, when configured in a
beacon-enabled mode, outperforms SMAC and PB-TDMA as
shown in Figure 3. However, the precise location of nodes and
the body position influence the packet delivery ratio.
Intel Corporation conducted a series of experiments to
analyze the performance of IEEE 802.15.4 for an on-body
sensor network [11]. They deployed a number of Intel Mote 2
[12] devices on chest, waist, and the right ankle. Figure 4
shows the packet delivery ratio at 0dBm transmit power when
a person is standing. The connection between ankle and waist
cannot be established, even for a short distance of 1.5m. All
other connections show favourable performance. A
modification of IEEE 802.15.4 standard towards on-body
sensor networks could give reasonable solution for some of the

medical applications, but limits its performance for
non-medical applications.

lower latency. The figure also shows packet latency of
standard CSMA/CA scheme used in IEEE 802.15.4.
The use of CSMA/CA for in-body communication does not
provide reliable solution [14]. The main reason is that the path
loss inside human body due to tissue heating is much higher
than the path loss in free space. The in-body nodes cannot
perform Clear Channel Assessment (CCA) in a favorable way.
Figure 6 shows the CCA for in-body and on-body nodes. For a
given -85dBm CCA threshold, the on-body nodes cannot see
the activity of in-body nodes when they are away at 3m from
the surface of the body.

Figure 3. Packet Delivery Ratio

100
80

Chest

60

Waist
Ankle

40

Figure 5. Average Packet Latency

20
0
Chest

Waist
99%

Chest
Waist

100%

Ankle

72%

Ankle
84%
50%

76%

Figure 4. Packet Delivery Ratio of IEEE 802.15.4 when a person is
standing

4. In-Body MAC
The most challenging task in developing a low-power
BSN-MAC protocol is to accommodate in-body sensor nodes
in a more efficient way. In-body nodes are implanted under
human skin and have critical power requirements. They are
totally different than on-body nodes in terms of power
efficiency and data transmission rate (10kbps for medical and
up to 10Mbps for non-medical applications). Moreover, they
need to send emergency data in less than 1 second to the
coordinator. This is a hot issue in the design and
implementation of an in-body MAC. The nodes are required to
be self triggered when exceeds a predefine threshold for
emergency situation. Critical data requires low latency and
high reliability. The solution is to adjust initial back-off
windows for critical and non-critical traffics [13]. Non-critical
traffic nodes have larger initial back-off window than critical
traffic nodes, i.e., (W0α ≤ W0β) where W0α is initial back-off
window for critical traffic nodes α and W0β is initial back-off
window for non-critical traffic nodes β. Figure 5 illustrates the
average packet latency for a number of in-body nodes. The
smaller initial back-off window for the critical nodes results in

Figure 6. CCA for In-body and On-body nodes

The alternative approach is to use a TDMA-Based solution to
accommodate the entire traffic classification of in-body nodes.
Table 1 shows the traffic classification and the corresponding
solutions. The on-demand traffic is further divided into
continuous and non-continuous traffics. The doctor may need
continuous flow of information in case of a surgery, or some
images for diagnosis and prescription. We present a solution to
handle the normal traffic in the in-body sensor network. The
communication is based on pre-defined (by company) or later
modified (by doctor) wake-up patterns that indicate the traffic
nature of the nodes. The wake-up patterns of all nodes are
organized into a table called Pattern-Based wake-up table. The
wake-up table is maintained by the coordinator/doctor. Based
on the node’s wake-up pattern, the coordinator can calculate
its own wake-up traffic. This could save energy of

Table 1. Traffic Classification in the In-body Sensor Network

Devices

Normal Traffic

Emergency
Traffic

Sensor nodes

Send data based on
wake-up patterns

Coordinator

Receive data

Sensor are
triggered when
exceeds a
predefined
threshold and
Send a Wake-up
Signal (Wake-up
Radio)
Receive
Wake-up Signal

the coordinator. The coordinator does not need to stay active
when there is no traffic from the nodes. Table 2 is an example
of a Pattern-Based Wake-up Table maintained by the
coordinator.
Table 2. Pattern-Based Wake-up Table

In-body sensor nodes
Blood Pressure (BP)
Electrocardiogram (ECG)
Electromyogram (EMG)
BSN Coordinator

Wake-up Patterns
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
1

In the above table, each node has a wake-up pattern
represented by 0 and 1. The digit 0 keeps the nodes into sleep
mode while 1 keeps them active for transmission. For example,
the wake-up pattern of BP node (011) means that it needs to
sleep during the first slot duration indicated by 0 and transmits
data during second and third slot duration indicated by 1. The
coordinator calculates its own wake-up pattern (111) based on
the node’s pattern. The coordinator goes into sleep mode
when all nodes do not send data, i.e., when their wake-up
patterns contain only 0. The number of 1’s in the same column
does not indicate traffic at the same time t. The wake-up table
is based on TDMA scheme. Figure 7 represents the above
table in a set of TDMA frames.

Figure 7. Pattern-Based TDMA

On-demand traffic
Continuous
Receives wake-up
signal from coordinator
in case of e.g., Surgical
events

Non-continuous
Receives wake-up signal
from coordinator when
requires limited information
(not continuous) e.g., images

Send a wake-up signal
(Wake-up Radio)

Send a wake-up signal
(Wake-up Radio)

Each node transmits data in its own TDMA slot. For
example, a BP node transmits in the first, an ECG in the
second, and an EMG in the third TDMA slot. For the wake-up
pattern 011, the BP node sleeps during the first TDMA frame
and transmits data to the coordinator in the first slots of second
and third TDMA frames.
The pattern-based wake-up table is used to handle normal
traffic in the in-body sensor network. For emergency and
on-demand traffics, the nodes and the coordinator send a
wake-up signal of a very short duration. However, traditional
wake-up radio concepts have several limitations when
considered in the in-body sensor network. They are not able to
wake-up a particular node. All nodes wake-up in response to a
single wake-up signal, which is not the required environment.
The use of different radio frequencies to wake-up a particular
node may provide an optimal solution.

5. Conclusions
The traffic in a BSN is classified into normal, emergency,
and on-demand traffics. None of the existing MAC protocols
can accommodate these diverse traffic requirements in a
power efficient manner. We presented a performance analysis
of various MAC protocols including IEEE 802.15.4 for
on-body sensor networks. The on-body sensor networks
comprise of non-invasive sensor nodes used for medical,
interactive gaming and entertainment applications. They are
totally different than in-body sensor networks in terms of
power consumption and data transmission rate. In-body sensor
nodes are implanted under human skin and require efficient
power management techniques to prolong sensor life time up
to many years. The use of CSMA/CA is not reliable due to
high path loss inside the human body. We suggested a TDMA
based solution to handle normal traffic in the in-body sensor
networks. Our proposed method provided a reliable solution
towards energy efficient communication in the in-body sensor
networks.

Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the IT R&D program of
MKE/IITA, [2008-F-050-01, Development of WBAN system
for In-body and On-body]
REFERENCES
[1]

C. Otto, A. Milenkovic, C. Sanders, E. Jovanov, "System
Architecture of a Wireless Body Area Sensor Network for
Ubiquitous Health Monitoring," Journal of Mobile Multimedia,
Vol. 1, No. 4, pp. 307-326, 2006.

[2]

Wei Ye, John Heidemann and Deborah Estrin, Medium Access
Control with Coordinated Adaptive Sleeping for Wireless Sensor
Networks IEEE Communications Letters Vol. 12 No 3 Pages 493 –
506 June 2004.

[3]

Z. Chen and A. Khokhar, “Self Organization and Energy Efficient
TDMA MAC Protocol by Wake Up For Wireless Sensor
Networks,” Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on
Sensors and Adhoc Communication and Networks (SECON 2004),
in print, October, 2004.

[4]

T. V. Dam and K. Langendoen, “An Adaptive Energy-Efficient
MAC Protocol for Wireless Sensor Networks,” in SenSys’03, Los
Angeles, Nov.2003, pp.171-180.

[5]

TIEEE Std.802.15.4: Wireless medium access control (MAC) and
physical layer (PHY) specifications for low data rate wireless
personal area networks (WPAN), 2006.T

[6]

A. El-Hoiydi and J.-D. Decotignie, WiseMAC: An Ultra Low
Power MAC Protocol for the Downlink of InfrastructureWireless
Sensor Networks, in the Proceedings of the Ninth IEEE
Symposium on Computers and Communication, ISCC’04, pages
244-251, Alexandria, Egypt, June 2004.

[7]

http://www.ieee802.org/15/pub/TG6.html
Date visited: 16 April 2008

[8]

Nicholas F. Timmons, William G. Scanlon, ``Analysis of the
performance of IEEE 802.15.4 for medical sensor body area
networking'', IEEE SECON 2004.

[9]

Sana Ullah, Riazul Islam, Ahasanun Nessa, Yingji Zhong, Kwak
Kyung Sup, Performance Analysis of a Preamble Based TDMA
Protocol for Wireless Body Area Network, Journal of
Communications Software and Systems, Volume 4, Number 3,
November 2008

[10]

http://www.isi.edu/nsnam/ns/ Date visited: 26 March 2008.

[11]

Shah, R.C.; Yarvis, M., "Characteristics of on-body 802.15.4
networks," Wireless Mesh Networks, 2006. WiMesh 2006. 2nd
IEEE Workshop on , vol., no., pp.138-139, 25-28 Sept. 2006

[12]

R. Adler et. al., “Intel Mote 2: An advanced platform for
demanding sensor network applications”, Demo session, Sensys
2005.

[13]

Feng Shu, Guido Dolmans, QoS Support in Wireless BANs, IEEE
P802.15 Working Group for Wireless Personal Area Networks
(WPANs), November 2008

[14]

Bin Zhen, Huan-Bang Li, and Ryuji Kohno, IEEE body area
networks and medical implant communications, Proceedings of
the ICST 3rd international conference on Body area networks,
Tempe, Arizona, 2008

